Manifesto on Algorithmic Sabotage
Athens, May 2024

0) Algorithmic Sabotage is a figure of techno-disobedience for the militancy
that's absent from technology critique.

1) Rather than an atavistic aversion to technology, Algorithmic Sabotage can
be read as a form of counter-power that emerges from the strength of the
community that wields it.

2) Algorithmic Sabotage cuts through the capitalist ideological framework that
thrives on misery by performing a labour of subversion in the present,
dismantling contemporary forms of algorithmic domination and reclaiming spaces
for ethical action from generalized thoughtlessness and automaticity.

3) Algorithmic Sabotage is an action-oriented commitment to solidarity that
precedes any system of social, legal or algorithmic classification.

4) Algorithmic Sabotage is a part of a structural renewal of a wider movement for
social autonomy that opposes the predations of hegemonic technology through
wildcat direct action, consciously aligned itself with ideals of social justice
and egalitarianism.

5) Algorithmic Sabotage radically reworks our technopolitical arrangements away
from the structural injustices, supremacist perspectives and necropolitical
authoritarian power layered into the “algorithmic empire”, highlighting its
materiality and consequences in terms of both carbon emissions and the
centralisation of control.

6) Algorithmic Sabotage refuses algorithmic humiliation for power and profit
maximisation, focusing on activities of mutual aid and solidarity.

7) The first step of techno-politics is not technological but political. Radical
feminist, anti-fascist and decolonial perspectives are a political challenge to
Algorithmic Sabotage, placing matters of interdependence and collective care
against reductive optimisations of the algorithmic empire.

8) Algorithmic Sabotage struggles against algorithmic violence and fascist
techno-solutionism, focusing on artistic-activist resistances that can express
a different mentality, a collective “counter-intelligence”.

9) Algorithmic Sabotage is an emancipatory defence of the need for communal
constraint of harmful technology, a struggle against the abstract segregation
above and below the algorithm.

