Merveilles Retreat 2025

June 27-29, 2025
Blakely Island, WA
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blakely_Island,_Washington

Where, Getting there and back

We will gather at a site near the South end of the island. We have access to the
entirety of Blakely, and the area where we will gather is on 40 acres of private
land, which includes 4 small houses and plenty of camping space.

Blakely is technically a private island, and is not serviced by a vehicle ferry.
However, there are many ways to get to and from the island. You can travel from
Seattle or drive to Anacortes, which is about 80 miles north of Seattle, and
then cross the water from there.

Water taxis

    Island Express
    https://islandexpresscharters.com/
    or Paraclete
    https://business.anacortes.org/list/member/paraclete-charter-service-inc-497
    These companies are both great, and they are very familiar with this
    island. Island Express is probably the best choice because they run more
    often each day. They both operate out of Skyline Marina in Anacortes.

    Call the taxi operator and make a reservation for your trip. They sometimes
    have trouble accommodating walk-ons without reservations, so this step is
    important. They will also want to know your return-to-mainland timing.
    Default for the trip will be a mid-day on the 29th, but make whatever
    arrangement works for you.

    There is safe street parking near the water taxi dock, and there is also a
    dedicated lot which you can use if you register your car with the front
    desk, there. Either parking method is fine.

    Note that for the outbound trip, the taxi operator should be instructed to
    bring you to the SOUTH end of Blakely. If you're dropped at the North end
    of the island instead, you'll be stranded and you will then have to hope
    for a rescue to arrive while you slowly go mad and starve and decide which
    one of  your companions to eat.

Airplane

    If you plan to fly - great! Please let us know, though, so that we can get
    you from the airstrip to the Midsommar site - it's a few miles away. The
    airstrip is: [https://www.airnav.com/airport/38wa]
    Floatplane via Kenmore Air standard route
    If you can arrive on the 27th in the morning, you're welcome to fly via
    Kenmore Air to “Rosario” (these flights are about $169 one-way), and we
    will pick you up from there!

    Floatplane direct (Kenmore or other)
    Obviously an expensive option, but maybe doable as a group: You are welcome
    to charter a floatplane to fly directly to the Midsommar site. Contact us
    for info!

    Private boat
    There is moorage for private boats to tie up for the duration of the event.
    In a pinch, gregori or devine will ferry you across!

If you need to LEAVE the island at any time, you can call one of the water
taxis. They run several trips per day, but they need to specifically schedule a
pickup at the South Blakely dock in order to come get you. Advance notice works
best, but they can accommodate last-minute requests. See below for info on
leaving in an emergency.

Accommodations

There are four houses on the island, if you don't like camping, you're welcome
to stay at one of the house, which will be the gathering place anyhow.

Food

Sorenson has very generously offered to be our chef for the weekend! We don’t
have a specific menu plan yet. Please offer him some input if you would like to
influence the food on offer. We will spend some time on this and update the
group about the menu closer to event time, including info related to food
allergies, etc.

You are also of course welcome to bring any food you would like to bring, and
Sorenson promises that his feelings won’t be hurt if you choose not to eat his
meals.

Schedule

    June 27th
    Arrival - afternoon, any time. We will gather for dinner at 6:00. Then hang
    around by the fire till we pass out.

    June 28th
    Morning coffee, pastries, and an (optional!) hike. One easy, one hard, you
    choose - or sit and look at the view! Important info: there’s a good
    espresso machine in the main house, and gregori loves making espresso
    drinks - just ask aleph.
	Lunch at 1:00.
	Afternoon art workshops. Drawing (class?). Group-coding with tea? Dinner at
    6:00.
	Evening show and tell. Kind of unstructured?
	Algorave / dance music, IDK.

	June 29th
	Breakfast
	Hang out
	Walk on the beach
	Depart. Sweet sorrow!

What to bring

Shoes to hike in, if you choose to.
Any food that you know you want to eat, aside from what will be provided

If you are allergic to sleeping indoors, you’re welcome to bring a tent! Also,
if we run over capacity, we will let everyone know and ask for some people to
volunteer to sleep in those. Campers will obviously need to bring extra gear,
like sleeping bags, etc.

Plus-ones!

You may bring a plus-one if you are either
	1. camping or 
	2. can share a double bed, if you're staying in a house. 

Please don't invite more than one guest. Service animals welcome. Please leave 
other pets at home.

Cost

We might ask those who are able to contribute a nominal sum just to cover the
cost of food.

The water taxis are already paid for - no need to pay for that at all. If they
forget this, please just remind them. (You’re welcome to give them a tip or
whatever, but they don’t expect this. Just don’t pay for the fare.)

There will be no additional costs.

Accessibility

Accessing the Blakely property by boat requires some steep path navigation from
the boat dock to a land vehicle above the landing area. There is also an
accessible ramp from a neighbor’s boat dock - just let us know if you’d like to
use it, and we’ll coordinate with the neighbor! Aside from the steep ramp, there
will probably be some light outdoor walking required over dirt paths or roads,
but no significant distance. There are a few bunk beds which require climbing up
ladders, but there are also plenty of beds at normal/floor level.

Medical emergencies

If anyone is hurt or sick enough to need the hospital ASAP, calling 911 will
summon a helicopter to the island (!) - there is a landing area at a neighboring
property. That is an expensive option, but it is available for those who need
it. If the need is less urgent, the water taxi can assist, or those who have
boats at the island (devine/rek, gregori, maybe others) can definitely help if
needed. There are good hospitals in Bellingham and in Friday Harbor.

Whose place is this?

Your hosts/coordinators for the event are devine, aleph, wryl, gregori. The
property belongs to gregori and his family.

Repondez, s'il vous plait

Please let us know you're coming! Ask any questions any time. Looking forward to
this!!

Important phone numbers
gregori - (206) 356-8265

